Independent Contractor Agreements
=================================

These documents are designed to allow DAO collectives to hire independent
contractors to accomplish various tasks for them much the same way a company
would. This document has been adapted from an American independent contractor
agreement and was primarily used in an office or IT setting.

**No warrant, attestation, affirmation, or commitment is made to the validity,
enforceability, or legality of these agreements. Legal opinions provided in this
repository do not constitute legal advice from the associated attorneys.**

Background
----------

This section is meant to provide some foundations for the subsequent
understandings. Most DAOs, at the time of this writing, are not fully understood
by many existing legal frameworks. As such, many DAOs have decided to organize
under other legal entities that permit them to represent themselves legally
while retaining their autonomy. This is fundamentally what the “legal wrapper”
is. It is important to establish how the DAO is representing itself legally
up-front as it sets the tone for formal legal procedure - as well as who will be
signing the Contractor’s checks.

The Mission Statement is a potentially removable blank, but is left in as it is
considered useful for contextualizing the Services that the Contractor is
expected to perform.

Clause Commentary
-----------------

The following is plain-language commentary on the intent of individual clauses
in the Agreement. **The language actually used may not adequately accomplish the
intent. As before, no warrant, attestation, affirmation, or commitment is made
to the validity, enforceability, or legality of the Agreement, nor any
individual clause. Nothing in this commentary constitutes legal advice.**

### Engagement

Exhibit A is where all the job description and semantics should go, along with
any specific expectations regarding reporting or procedural fulfillment of the
Contractor’s duties. Be sure to reconcile this against the *Independent
Contractor Status Controls* section; it disavows a number of specific functions
to firmly establish itself in various legal precedents and make the Agreement
more multi-jurisdiction. As with everything, it’s up to the user to change some
of these functions if it’s not acceptable for their circumstances, but the legal
effects of changes are naturally unknown until they are made and reviewed.

### Compensation

Exhibit B is the Contractor’s pay schedule. Any signing bonuses (along with
return of said bonuses if certain milestones aren’t hit) can be handled there as
well.

### Term

**It is important to consider this blank.** The blank may also be deleted and
replaced with the term ‘in perpetuity’ if the situation calls for it. However,
the Agreement makes little sense without this determined.

### Independent Contractor Status Controls

**It is important to consider these blanks.** The general thought and intent is
that the first blank should relate to the regulations surrounding the Legal
Wrapper. If the Legal Wrapper is Swiss, it is important to first and foremost
comply with Swiss regulations. The second blank is left as flex, in case the
Contractor is from a jurisdiction that has salient regulations. So if the
Contractor is Moroccan, and it is important to comply with labor laws in
Morocco, such jurisdiction(s) can be called out here.

The sub-points underneath this clause should also be considered carefully. These
are traits that tend to characterize independent contractors (in the American
and European sense of the term) and are intended to make it very clear what the
intent of the arrangement is. It is perhaps more difficult, for example, to
claim some sort of employee relationship (with the associated obligations) if it
is explicitly called out that the Contractor does not have an exclusive
relationship. These points can vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, though,
and just as much as anything else, it may not suit a particular situation for a
Contractor to not be held to a specific daily work schedule. It is important
that these points do not conflict with Exhibit A.

### Confidentiality and Non-Disclosure

This is pretty important in the office/IT/technology context that the original
documents were adapted from. Pretty much any system will have specifics they’d
just as soon not be out to the whole world. The primary thing to notice here is
that the way this is worded, the confidential information is noted as a
possession of the Collective, not the Legal Wrapper. Ensure your Legal Wrapper
has the appropriate mandates to prosecute these breaches on behalf of the
Collective.

### Intellectual Property Rights

Again, this is all tailored to an office/IT/technology context, and goes part in
parcel with the Confidentiality clauses. Even in the case where the Collective
has no interest in reserving intellectual property for its own gain, an
invention inspired by some structure or happenstance regarding the Collective
could compromise the Collective’s functionality or viability if it’s handled
incorrectly. This is really intended to just give the Collective some standing
in matters that affect it.

### Data Protection

Once more, tailored to an office/IT/technology context, but critical in being
compliant with a lot of laws. Privacy and data breaches are big deals, and
procedures surrounding remediation and curing them are the only defense
organizations have against being turned inside out by courts if things go wrong.

### Representations and Warranties

**It is important to review and fully understand this section before giving it
to a Contractor.** The given clauses are very simple and bog-standard, but these
representations form the cornerstone of the overall Agreement. If one of these
is later shown to be false, the working relationship is seriously compromised
and can fall apart entirely. It is worth seriously considering if, in your
situation, anything needs to be *added* here, because it is a base assumption
for the relationship.

### Taxes

**It is important to review and fully understand this section before giving it
to a Contractor.** The given clauses are intended to put the entire burden of
understanding, calculating, and paying applicable taxes onto the Contractor -
which is something independent contractors typically do. This is an important
section, however, so make sure that it does what you need it to do for your
situation.

### Nonsolicitation and Nondisparagement

**It is important to consider the blank here.** This is intended to be a fairly
standard clause to discourage poaching and bad-mouthing. These clauses may have
imposed limitations depending on jurisdictions that make certain answers to this
blank unenforceable.

### Termination

**It is important to review and fully understand this section before giving it
to a Contractor.** The given clauses require 15 days notice of termination, both
ways. This can mean that your Collective will have to pay a last paycheck beyond
the day that it actually terminates a Contractor. There are with-cause clauses
for immediate termination, as well.

### Governing Law; Jurisdiction

**It is important to consider the blank here.** The jurisdictions noted in
*Independent Contractor Status Controls* form statements of intent, but this is
where the ‘rubber hits the road’, as it were. Disputes and resolutions will be
primarily handled through the answer to this blank.

### Notice

**It is important to consider the blanks here.** These registrations are used
for official notifications, which are currently used by the Data Protection
Addendum and could be used by whatever other internal procedures your Collective
has.

### Disputes

**It is important to consider the blanks here.** This is where your Collective
articulates how any contract disputes are going to go. The Arbitration blank can
denote a specific place the disputes will be arbitrated, and are traditionally
some city ultimately subject to the *Governing Law; Jurisdiction* place, above.
The Arbitration Administrator is typically some law firm or company that has a
respected presence there. The given clauses also give fallbacks for if the
jurisdiction is not valid somehow. These should be reviewed and changed if it
causes any pain with the Collective.

### Signature Block

In many collectives, one person cannot sign for the Collective; that is part of
the point of DAOs, they make their decisions collectively and sign off on things
as a unit. This fits awkwardly into the traditional legal world, where the
signature is the standard unit of trust. Consequently, a representative of the
Legal Wrapper is expected to sign, and however the Legal Wrapper gains its
mandate to sign is a matter for itself and the Collective.

Data Protection Addendum
------------------------

This is again taken from the office/IT/tech context that these documents were
originally set up to service. They are intended to be fairly standard procedures
for complying with California’s CCPA privacy regulation, which is itself
inspired by the European GDPR. Again, one rather important point is that this is
worded in such a way that the Collective owns this data and all the systems, so
the Legal Wrapper will be acting on behalf of the Collective in the case of an
unremediated breach.
